#summary Overview and introduction to the nodeviz project

= Introduction =

NodeViz was created because we wanted to be able to embed interactive network diagrams on a web page.  Projects like GraphViz offer partial solutions for rendering networks in web-friendly formats, but don't do much to help with the interaction. After writing a few sites with custom code to build networks from a database display them, we've tried to bundle some of the functionality. 

We are also usually dealing with situations where the network we are displaying is a subset of huge pile of relations stored in multiple tables in a database. This project is structured to simplify the process of converting the SQL queries into a network. 


= Details =

NodeViz has two main parts:
  * Server-side code in PHP which can handle requests, assemble an appropriate network based on parameters, and render it using GraphViz

  * Client-side code in JavaScript which can request a graph from the server, insert an SVG (or JPEG) image of the graph into the DOM, render the graph data as a list, and handle selecting and zooming events.



= Features =

  * The network is embedded in the page as SVG, and is part of the web page DOM. This means that it can be styled using CSS!

  * Graceful degradation to non-SVG browsers. When you view with IE 7 or 8 (which cannot display inline SVG, the network image is displayed as an image with an imagemap and events should still work.

  * Networks can be rendered as both graphs and lists, with synchronized interaction between them. 

  * Networks can be cached on the server to avoid repeating the expensive network layout process.

  * A structured template for assembling a network from an arbitrary data source (usually a database).

  * AJAX callbacks for sending the client additional data associated with nodes or edges. 

  * Supports multiple node types (i.e 'classes') and edge types for constructing multi-partite graphs and handling interaction and list construction appropriately.

  * Zooming and panning the network in the browser, including zoomToNode methods. Can also apply zoomLevel classes to elements to selectively hide and reveal as zoom levels change. 

= Dependencies = 

  * PHP
  * GraphViz open source graph drawing package http://graphviz.org
  * Scriptaculous JS library http://script.aculo.us/
  * Prototype JS library http://www.prototypejs.org/
  * ImageMagick http://www.imagemagick.org/

= What NodeViz does not do = 
  * Network analysis (try Gephi, the R network library, Pajek, etc)
  * Its not the simplest way to throw up a basic network image on the web. Depending on your use case, you might want to checkout some of these alternatives:
    * [http://thejit.org/demos/ Javascript Infoviz Toolkit]
    * [http://code.google.com/apis/chart/image/docs/gallery/graphviz.html Google Charts GraphViz]
    * [http://mbostock.github.com/d3/ex/force.html d3]
    * or some of the alternatives listed on this [http://skyeome.net/projects/networkChart/comparison.html example page]